# Kartoza's Thirty Principles

1. We are innovative. This means we are not set in our ways. We have a diverse toolset and skills and while we retain combinations that work well, we readily change and adapt these and discard those that don't work.
2. Company decisions conform to the [Strategic Objective](strategic_objective.md), these Thirty Principles and [Working Procedures]() documents.
3. We are a lean and agile company and follow [SAFe](https://www.scaledagileframework.com) principles.
4. We promote open and easy access to information.
5. We provide opportunities for community involvement.
6. We provide opportunities for education and training in FOSS tools and GISc.
7. Our internal systems and client-facing solutions are scalable, resilient and reliable.
8. We are the highest-quality spatial IT company in South Africa and equal to the best globally. We do whatever it takes to ensure the quality of service to our clients, employees and suppliers is impeccable.
9. We draw solid lines, thus providing an exact status of where things stand. Documented procedures are the main defence against grey-area problems.
10. "Get the job done." Can the employee do his or her job, or is there always a complication of one kind or another? This ability to "get the job done quickly and accurately without excuses or complications" is the most valuable trait an employee can possess.
11. Employees come first. We employ people who have an innate desire to perform at a hundred percent. We reward them accordingly. The natural outcome is that we serve our clients well.
12. We are not fire killers. We are fire prevention specialists. We don't manage problems; we work on system enhancement and system maintenance to prevent problems from happening in the first place.
13. Problems are gifts that inspire us to action. A problem prompts the act of creating or improving a system or procedure. We don't want setbacks, but when one occurs we think, "thank you for this wake-up call," and take assertive system-improvement action to prevent the setback from happening again.
14. We focus on just [[a few manageable markets|Kartoza Portfolio Offerings]]. Although we watch for new opportunities, in the end we provide "just a few products and services implemented in superb fashion," rather than a complex array of average-quality offerings.
15. We find the simplest solution. Ockham's Law, also called the Law of Economy, states, "Entities are not to be multiplied beyond necessity . . . the simplest solution is invariably the correct solution."
16. The money we save or waste is not Monopoly money! We are careful not to devalue the worth of a Rand (or Dollar or Rupiah or Euro) just because it has to do with the business.
17. We operate the company via documented procedures and systems. "Any recurring problem can be solved with a system." We take the necessary time to create and implement systems and procedures and in the end, it is well worth it. If there is a recurring problem, a written procedure is created to prevent the problem from happening again. On the other hand, we don't bog down the organisation with processes and procedures that target once-in-a-while situations. Sometimes we elect to not create a procedure.
18. "Just don't do it." Eliminate the unnecessary. Many times, elimination of a system, protocol, or potential project is a very good thing. Think simplicity. Automate. Refine to the smallest number of steps or discard altogether. Would a simple "no" save time, energy or money?
19. Our documented systems, procedures, and functions are "off-the-street." This means anyone with appropriate training can perform procedures unassisted. The real-world evidence of this is we can hire an individual "off-the-street" who has good GIS or programming skills and have him or her doing QGIS or development work within a week. For this result, protocols have to be efficient, simple, and thoroughly documented.
20. Do it NOW. All actions build on "point-of-sale" theory. We don't delay an action if it can be done immediately. Just like any major retail outlet, we "update inventories and databases at the exact time the transaction takes place." There is no paperwork floating around the office after a physical transaction. We ask, "How can we perform the task NOW without creating lingering details that we must clean up later?"
21. We glean the Kartoza mindset from Stephen Covey's books, including The 7 Habits of Highly Successful People, First Things First, and The 8th Habit. As well, we consider Good to Great by Jim Collins; The E-Myth Revisited by Michael Gerber; Awaken the Giant Within by Anthony Robbins; Maverick by Ricardo Semler; Work the System by Sam Carpenter.
22. We pattern individual organisation upon Franklin-Covey theory. We use organising mechanisms that are always at hand. We prioritise, schedule, and document. The system is always up-to-date and we use it all the time. For Kartoza, these are Github, Google Suite (Mail, Drive, etc.), SyncThing, Sage, OpenProject and others (subject to change as of August 2020)
23. Sequence and priority are critical. We work on the most important tasks first. We spend maximum time on "non-urgent/important" tasks via Stephen Covey's time-matrix philosophy.
24. We double-check everything before release. If a penchant for double-checking is not an innate personal habit, then it must be cultivated. Double-checking is a conscious step in every task, performed either by the individual managing the task or someone else.
25. Our environment is spotless: clean and ordered, simple, efficient, functional. No "rat's nests", literally or figuratively.
26. Employee training is structured, scheduled, and thorough. Assertive client contact is also structured, scheduled, and thorough.
27. We are deadline-obsessed. If someone in the organisation says they will be finished with a task or project by a certain date and time, then he or she commits to finishing by that deadline (or, if legitimate delays intrude, advise coworkers well in advance that the deadline is impossible to meet).
28. We maintain equipment and keep it a hundred percent functional at all times. If something is not working as it should, fix it now even if it's not necessary to fix it now. It's a matter of good housekeeping and of maintaining good habits. This is just the way we do things.
29. Mastery of the English language is critical. We are aware of how we sound and what we write. We do whatever we can to improve. We are patient as a coworker corrects us.
30. We study to increase our skills. A steady diet of reading and contemplation is vital to personal development. It is a matter of self-discipline.
31. We avoid multitasking activities. When communicating with someone else, we are a hundred percent present. We give full attention to the person in front of us (or to the task at hand). We focus on listening and understanding. Read the classic 'Treating Type A Behaviour and Your Heart' by Meyer Friedman. "Mindfulness" is paying complete attention to one thing at a time: read 'Full Catastrophe Living' by Jon Kabat-Zinn.
32. When in the office we work hard on Kartoza business. We keep our heads down; we focus, and in turn the company pays well. That's "the deal". The work week rarely exceeds forty hours.
33. Complete means "complete." Almost or tomorrow is not "complete." In particular, this is germane to GitHub issues.
34. We strive for a social climate that is serious and quiet yet pleasant, serene, light, and friendly. Kartoza is a nice place to work.
35. As opposed to "doing the work," an "operations manager's" job is to create, monitor, and document systems (which consist of people, equipment, procedures, and maintenance schedules).
36. The Managing Director(s) oversee department heads and overall systems. It is the MD's job to direct, coordinate, and monitor the company.
